---
layout: page
title: Machine learning
sitemap: false
permalink: /machine_learning
---

## Harnessing Machine Learning to Transform Biomedical Research

In the rapidly evolving field of biomedical research, machine learning has emerged as a transformative tool that enhances our ability to analyze complex biological data. By leveraging algorithms that can learn from and make predictions based on data, researchers can uncover insights that were previously unattainable through traditional statistical methods. This capability is particularly crucial in understanding the complexities of diseases, guiding diagnosis, and developing targeted therapies.

## Tailoring Machine Learning Methods to Biomedical Challenges

Machine learning offers a variety of approaches, typically divided into supervised and unsupervised learning methods.

- **Supervised learning** involves training models on labeled datasets, where outcomes are already known. In biomedical studies, this is particularly useful for classifying disease subtypes or predicting treatment responses based on gene expression data. I applied supervised techniques such as **Linear Discriminant Analysis** (LDA), **Support Vector Machines** (SVM), and **Random Forest** to analyze differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in cancer research. These methods have been instrumental in identifying key features that differentiate between disease subtypes, leading to more accurate diagnostic and treatment strategies.

- **Unsupervised learning** offers a different approach, focusing on discovering hidden patterns within unlabeled data. Techniques such as **hierarchical clustering** and **k-means clustering** are applied to group samples based on their similarities, revealing potential subtypes or novel classifications that may not have been previously identified. By applying unsupervised learning to transcriptomic data, I have identified clusters of cell lines that share common gene expression profiles. These discoveries help deepen our understanding of the biological processes driving disease and suggest new avenues for treatment.

## Machine Learning for Omics Data

The integration of both supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques enhances the analysis of **omics** data, providing a comprehensive view of biological systems. This dual approach not only enhances our understanding of disease processes but also aids in the discovery of potential therapeutic targets and biomarkers. The ability to predict patient outcomes based on gene expression data is particularly significant in the era of personalized medicine, where tailored treatment plans can be developed based on an individual’s unique genetic makeup.

As an example of applying machine learning in biomedical studies, I utilized gene expression data from the transcriptomes of cancer patients to showcase its potential. However, the application of machine learning goes far beyond cancer research and transcriptomics. It can also be applied in areas such as **genomics**, **proteomics**, and **pharmacogenomics** to analyze the vast datasets generated by high-throughput technologies. As the volume of biological data continues to expand, machine learning will play an increasingly vital role in extracting meaningful insights and driving advancements in healthcare.

## Contribution for Biomedical Innovation

In summary, the combination of machine learning methods with **omics** data is revolutionizing biomedical research, providing powerful tools to classify diseases, identify important biological features, and ultimately improve patient outcomes.

Learn more about supervised machine learning methods and how they are applied in biomedical research to classify diseases and predict outcomes [here](https://vanngocthuyla.github.io/Data_Analysis/_pages/omics/supervised).

Explore unsupervised machine learning techniques used to discover hidden patterns in biological data and identify new disease subtypes [here](https://vanngocthuyla.github.io/Data_Analysis/_pages/omics/unsupervised).
